#LyX 1.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 221
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

System Administration for the Web:
\newline 
Week 7 Lab
\layout Date

October 24, 2005
\layout Section

Notes
\layout Standard

This laboratory focuses entirely upon programming in Perl.
 We understand that many of you have had no programming experience at all,
 so we've tried to make this laboratory as simple as possible.
 However, don't feel too bad if you don't completely understand what you're
 doing -- we aren't expecting you to learn how to program in just 40 minutes.
 
\emph on 
You should be able to complete these exercises, though
\emph default 
.
 We're planning on making one part of the project a programming exercise,
 so it's in your best interests to at least attempt to complete this assignment
 and ask questions if you run into trouble.
\layout Section

Running Perl Programs
\layout Standard

To a computer, Perl programs are just ordinary text files.
 They only know to run a Perl program if you give your Perl program the
 appropriate permissions.
 In this case, the minimum permissions are read and execute.
\layout Standard

If you've correctly specified the 
\emph on 
shebang
\emph default 
 line and set the correct permissions, executing your Perl program is as
 simple as typing something like the following:
\layout LyX-Code

./my_perl_program
\layout Standard

in the directory that contains your Perl program.
 In the off-chance that you've accidentally created an infinite loop in
 your program, please recall that you can press 
\family typewriter 
Ctrl-C 
\family default 
to terminate the execution of a program.
\layout Section

Lab for Week 7
\layout Subsection

Modifying A Simple Perl Program
\layout Standard

The first half of this laboratory will be modifying the guessing number
 game presented during lecture and in the lecture notes.
 I've conveniently placed a copy of this program in the 
\family typewriter 
/home/cc/cs198/fa05/class/cs198-ec/labs/lab7
\family default 
 directory.
\layout Description

[1] Copy the 
\family typewriter 
guess_the_number.pl
\family default 
 file to your home directory.
\layout Description

[2] Modify the program to ask the user for the maximum random number.
\layout Description

[3] Modify the program to count the number of guesses a person uses and
 to print this number when the user guesses the correct number.
\layout Subsection

Writing Your Own Programs
\layout Description

[1] Write a program that prompts the user for and reads two numbers (on
 separate lines of input) and prints out the product of the two numbers
 multiplied together.
\layout Description

[2] Write a program that will ask the user for a given name and report the
 corresponding family name.
 Use a hash of given and family names in your program.
\the_end
