#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage[lists=normal]{savetrees}
%\usepackage{fullpage}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\begin_modules
enumitem
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks false
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize letterpaper
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth -1
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Lab 06
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Software management or 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love APT
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Hands-on Unix system administration DeCal
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
2012-10-08, due 2012-10-15
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Your answers should only contain commands or brief responses.
 Please save trees, don't print out your computer's output.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If you don't know what a command does, skim the manpage, e.g.
 
\family typewriter
man tee
\family default
.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Building a Debian package
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Debian has a robust binary package management system, and in almost all
 cases, you'll never need to compile or build software from source.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But as a Unix sysadmin, you might need more flexibility:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
use a newer version of package which is unavailable in the repositories
 (hasn't yet been packaged)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
apply a patch for further customization or bugfixes
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
contribute to Debian by packaging
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this lab, you will (re)build a Debian package from source.
 It should work on any Debian-based system (for example, Ubuntu), including
 most OCF machines, which you should have an account on.
 First you will fetch the source package, which contains the software source
 code and some metadata, and then compile it into a binary package which
 can be installed with 
\family typewriter
dpkg
\family default
.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
First, check that some packages useful for building Debian packages are
 installed.
 They are 
\family typewriter
build-essential
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
devscripts
\family default
.
 You can check if a package is installed with 
\family typewriter
dpkg -l foobar
\family default
, and install it with 
\family typewriter
aptitude install foobar
\family default
.
 You need root privileges to install packages since they get installed systemwid
e.
 
\emph on
Explain why you might not have root privileges on an OCF computer
\emph default
.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Fetch the source code of 
\family typewriter
hello
\family default
 (as in 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

hello world
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

).
 Change to a temporary directory, such as 
\family typewriter
/tmp
\family default
, and make a directory inside it using 
\family typewriter
mkdir
\family default
 and change to that directory.
 From the directory, you can run 
\family typewriter
apt-get source hello
\family default
 to fetch the source package.
 
\emph on
Describe how 
\family typewriter
apt-get source
\family default
 works
\emph default
.
 Hint: 
\family typewriter
man apt-get
\family default
 to find out what 
\family typewriter
apt-get source
\family default
 does, in particular the role of the 
\family typewriter
source.list
\family default
 file (take a look at 
\family typewriter
/etc/apt/sources.list
\family default
).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
In your current directory, there should be a directory, a 
\family typewriter
*.debian.tar.gz
\family default
 file, a 
\family typewriter
*.dsc
\family default
 file, and a 
\family typewriter
*.orig.tar.gz
\family default
 file.
 The 
\family typewriter
*.orig.tar.gz
\family default
 file contains the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

upstream
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 source code for the program, in a compressed tarball.
 The 
\family typewriter
*.debian.tar.gz
\family default
 file (or in most other cases, 
\family typewriter
*.diff.tar.gz
\family default
) contains Debian-specific patches including packaging information.
 The 
\family typewriter
hello*
\family default
 directory contains the source code, with the Debian patchset applied.
 
\emph on
What do you think is the purpose of the 
\family typewriter
*.dsc
\family default
 file
\emph default
?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Change your working directory to the 
\family typewriter
hello*
\family default
 directory.
 There should be a directory called 
\family typewriter
debian
\family default
.
 This directory is the only difference between a Debian source package and
 a package meant to be 
\family typewriter
make install
\family default
ed.
 Change your working directory to the 
\family typewriter
debian
\family default
 directory.
 
\emph on
Describe what you think are the functions of the 
\family typewriter
changelog
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
control
\family default
 files
\emph default
.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Now move up one directory.
 You should again see the 
\family typewriter
debian
\family default
 directory, and some other files, including a 
\family typewriter
Makefile
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
configure
\family default
 script, as is standard for GNU packages.
 Now let's build the binary Debian package! Run the command 
\family typewriter
debuild -us -uc
\family default
 (the extra arguments tell 
\family typewriter
debuild
\family default
 not to sign the package, because we are not the package maintainer).
 
\emph on
Which package provides debuild
\emph default
? Hint: use 
\family typewriter
dpkg -S
\family default
.
 In case you're wondering, the 
\family typewriter
debian/rules
\family default
 file takes care of calling 
\family typewriter
./configure
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
make
\family default
 with the appropriate options when you build the source package, which is
 what you're seeing in the terminal.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Move up again another directory.
 You should now see a 
\family typewriter
*.deb
\family default
 file.
 This is the Debian binary package you built, which can be installed with
 
\family typewriter
dpkg -i
\family default
 (you need root privileges, see question 1).
 Extract the file with the command 
\family typewriter
ar vx *.deb
\family default
.
 Three files should have been extracted, 
\family typewriter
debian-binary
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
control.tar.gz
\family default
, and 
\family typewriter
data.tar.gz
\family default
.
 Now extract these two files with 
\family typewriter
tar xzvf control.tar.gz
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
tar xzvf data.tar.gz
\family default
.
 
\emph on
What are the dependencies of this binary package
\emph default
? Hint: take a look at the 
\family typewriter
control
\family default
 file which was extracted from 
\family typewriter
control.tar.gz
\family default
.
 
\emph on
Describe the contents of this binary package
\emph default
.
 Hint: take a look at the files extracted from 
\family typewriter
data.tar.gz
\family default
.
 You can also lookup information on the binary package by using 
\family typewriter
dpkg-deb
\family default
 (run 
\family typewriter
dpkg-deb --help
\family default
 for info).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Finally, clean up by removing the files you've created.
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
thispagestyle{empty}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
