#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage[margins=normal,lists=normal]{savetrees}
\usepackage{fullpage}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\begin_modules
enumitem
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks false
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize letterpaper
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth -1
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Lab 04
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

File management: starting from /
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Hands-on Unix system administration DeCal
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
2012-09-24, due 2012-10-01
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Your answers should only contain commands or brief responses.
 Please save trees, don't print out your computer's output.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If you don't know what a command does, skim the manpage, e.g.
 
\family typewriter
man tee
\family default
.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
What's the maximum length of a Unix filename? What characters cannot be
 used in a filename (hint: there are two)?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
How would you find the human-readable size of 
\family typewriter
/etc
\family default
? Why does 
\family typewriter
ls -ldh /etc
\family default
 not work?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
We have a directory 
\family typewriter
/tmp/test
\family default
.
 How can we recursively (directory and all files contained within it including
 subdirectories) change its owner to be user root and group root?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
What does the command 
\family typewriter
umask
\family default
 do, and why might you use it in your 
\family typewriter
.bashrc
\family default
 (assuming you use 
\family typewriter
bash
\family default
)?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
What is a symbolic link (symlink)?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
How can you create a symlink pointing to 
\family typewriter
/etc
\family default
 named 
\family typewriter
etcfiles
\family default
 in your current working directory? Hint: use 
\family typewriter
ln
\family default
 with an option.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
What happens if you delete a symlink? Is the target file affected? What
 about if you were to use a hard link instead of a symlink?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Show the octal representation of these permissions:
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Enumerate

\family typewriter
rwxr-xrw-
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate

\family typewriter
rw-r-----
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate

\family typewriter
--x-w-r--
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Enumerate
Why might you not want to have a file with permissions 
\family typewriter
777
\family default
 in your home directory?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
NFS
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
NFS, the Network File System, is a ubiquitous way to share data between
 servers.
 The OCF and EECS' Instructional Computing each have centralized NFS servers
 that store user data and often software.
 For this part of the lab, you will need to first SSH into the OCF using
 your OCF account if you haven't already:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\family typewriter
ssh user@ssh.ocf.berkeley.edu
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate-Resume
Run 
\family typewriter
df -h
\family default
 at a command prompt.
 What does this command do? What machine is your home directory stored on?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate-Resume
How can you tell whether a particular mount is a network share or a local
 drive? Take a guess as to what the different network shares in 
\family typewriter
df
\family default
's output are used for.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate-Resume
The 
\family typewriter
mount
\family default
 command gives you information about locally-mounted devices.
 What's the difference between the output of 
\family typewriter
mount
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
df -h
\family default
, and when would you want to use one over the other? What are mount options,
 and how are they represented in the output of 
\family typewriter
mount
\family default
?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Extra for Experts™!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate-Resume
What is meant by setuid, setgid, and sticky bit? How are they represented
 in octal notation?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate-Resume
Use the 
\family typewriter
find
\family default
 command with the 
\family typewriter
-perm
\family default
 option to print all setuid binaries on the system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate-Resume

\family typewriter
stat
\family default
 will give you some useful attributes and permissions about a file.
 How is the access time impacted by the 
\family typewriter
noatime
\family default
 mount option?
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
