---
title: Lab 2 - Shell Commands and Pipes
layout: lab
---
UNIX machines usually have a common set of commands pre-installed. While you could do this lab on a Mac or Linux machine using the Terminal, we recommend using SSH to do them on OCF machines. Follow the instructions at ocf.io/docs/services/shell to get started on the OCF login server.

To start this lab, copy and paste this segment into the terminal (this will download the lab2 folder, fill it with some practice files, and cd into the folder):

```
wget -qO- https://decal.ocf.berkeley.edu/lab2.tgz | tar xz && cd lab2
```

# Navigating the filesystem
## Files and Folders
To start off, type the tree command:
```
tree
```
...and press enter. This will draw a diagram of the entire file/folder hierarchy of the folder you’re in. 

Now type:
```
ls
```
This will show you the files in the current directory. To see the files in another folder, you can use the `cd` command (change directory). To go into the documents folder, type:

```
cd documents
```

Then type `ls` again to see the files in that folder.

To visit the folder containing your current folder (the parent folder), type:
```
cd ..
```

Try using `ls` and `cd` to explore this lab, and answer these questions:
1. How many files are in the `code` folder?
2. What happens when you try to use `cd` on a file (as opposed to a folder)?
3. What happens when you type `cd` by itself, without any arguments?
4. Go to the lab2 folder and type `ls -A`. Do you see anything different?

## Reading files
You can use the `cat` command to view the contents of files. Go into the `lab2` folder and type `cat README`. It should output a friendly message. Now answer these questions:
1. What happens when you run “cat binary_file” from inside the lab2 folder?
2. What happens when you run cat on a folder (as opposed to a file)?
3. Can you find the hidden file? What are its contents?

## Other file manipulation
To copy a file, use the `cp` command. For example, to make a copy of the `README` file:
```
cp README newfile
```
Then type `cat newfile` to see that it has the same contents as `README`.

Other commands:
```
mv newfile otherfile # Works like cp, but moves files instead of copying them
mkdir myfolder # Makes a folder (the command name is short for “make directory”)
touch myfile # Makes an empty file
rm myfile # Deletes a file (WARNING: this cannot be undone!)
```
Now answer these questions:
1. Try copying the `code` folder into a folder called `newcode`. Does it work? How can you make it work? If you aren’t sure, try doing a Google search to learn how to copy a folder.
2. Make a folder called `myfolder` and try to delete it with `rm`. Does it work? Again, try to figure out how to delete it.

## Command flags
After answering the above questions, you’ve used some extra options in commands. Most commands have dozens of options that can modify their behavior.

To list all files in a directory, but with extra information for each file, type:
```
ls -l
```
To learn about all options a command has, type `man <command>`, replacing `<command>` with the command you’re interested in.

Questions:
1. How do you list all files in a directory, with extra information, AND showing hidden files? Write the command.
2. At the start of this lab, you used the `tree` command to draw a diagram of the filesystem hierarchy. How can you show hidden files with the tree command? If you’re not sure, read `man tree`.

## Editing files
When you’re SSH’d into a remote server, you can’t use IDEs you’re familiar with* (IntelliJ, Eclipse, Xcode, etc). Instead, you’ll have to use text editors that work in the terminal. Vim and Emacs are popular options to use. If you’re interested in learning vim, run the “vimtutor” command. If you don’t want to learn either, you can use the “nano” editor, which is easy to use.

Use nano to edit the README file and add your own message:

```
nano README
```

\* There are ways to get around this-- you can use the sshfs command to mount a remote computer as a filesystem, or you can use SSH functionality in an IDE. But these methods can be time-consuming and unwieldy, so it’s important to learn how to use command-line text editors.

## Other useful commands
### `less`
Displays a file through a “pager.” This makes it easy to read through long files. For example, if you run `cat logs/apache-log.txt`, the output is so long, you might have to wait a few seconds to get through all of it! Instead, you can use `less` to scroll through the file easily:
```
less logs/apache-log.txt
```

Some tips for navigating in less:
* g goes to the top of the file, G goes to the bottom.
* Type / (forward slash) and then text to search for something. Use n and N to scroll through all matches.
* Use k and j to scroll up and down by small amounts.
* Use PgUp and PgDown to scroll up and down by large amounts.
* Press q to quit

Questions:
1. What is the date and time of the first entry in apache-log.txt? The last entry?
2. What is the date and time of the first log entry related to “archlinux”?

### `grep`
Can be used to search through files. As an example, look in the `logs/irc-ubuntu` folder, which contains logs of an IRC chatroom that provides support for Ubuntu users. Each file contains the messages sent for a particular day of the month (this sample was taken from the logs during August 2017).

To get a list of all messages containing the word “thank” on the logs for August 18, 2017:
```
grep thank 18.txt
```
If you don’t care about case-sensitivity (in this case, we don’t), you can use the `-i` option to ignore case:
```
grep -i thank 18.txt
```
Questions:
1. The documents/people file contains a list of (fake) people’s names, gender, and addresses. Use grep to find out which people live on “Agawam Street.” 

### `head` and `tail`
Gets the beginning or end of a file. To get the 20 most recent log entries:
```
tail -n 20 logs/apache-log.txt
```
To get the 20 first log entries:
```
head -n 20 logs/apache-log.txt
```

### `wc`
Stands for “word count.” It takes in a list of files and displays the number of lines, words, and bytes in each file.
```
wc logs/apache-log.txt
```
The `wc` command (as well as most commands in this lab) takes wildcards for processing multiple files at once. To get a word count of all the Ubuntu IRC logs:
```
wc logs/irc-ubuntu/*
```

Questions:
1. Usually you only care about line counts, and the other two numbers just make things confusing. Read the manpage for wc. How can you only get the line count, without any other numbers? Write the command to get just line counts for all the Ubuntu logs.

### `curl`
Displays a file from the internet.
```
curl https://www.ocf.berkeley.edu # HTML for the OCF’s website
curl https://api.github.com/users/ocf # Query Github’s JSON API
curl ifconfig.co # Figure out what your public IP address is
curl https://irclogs.ubuntu.com/2017/07/09/%23ubuntu.txt # #ubuntu IRC logs for July 9 2017
```
### `wget`
Downloads a file from the internet.
```
wget https://irclogs.ubuntu.com/2017/07/09/%23ubuntu.txt # download IRC logs
```
Questions:
1. What is the difference between `curl` and `wget`? When might you use one over the other?
2. Run `curl google.com`. Then run `wget google.com` and read the downloaded file. Are there any extra differences you see?

## Pipes and Redirection
Now that you’ve learned the basic commands (if you forget them, you can find a handy reference at cheatsheetworld.com/programming/unix-linux-cheat-sheet/), you’re ready to learn about what makes shells so powerful: being able to combine commands using pipes.

In the past examples, you were supplying a file argument to the commands. However, if you omit the file arguments, you can “pipe” the output from one command into another. The pipe character is | (to the right of the ] key and above the Enter key). Try running these examples to get a feel for how pipes work:

Print the contents of a file normally:
```
cat README
```
Pipe the output of `cat README` into wc:
```
cat README | wc
```
Same as above, but only print line counts:
```
cat README | wc -l
```
Show the number of times someone said "thank" on IRC on August 3 2017:
```
grep -i thank logs/irc-ubuntu/03.txt | wc -l
```
Get a word count of [War and Peace](https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/2600), without downloading a file to disk:
```
curl https://www.gutenberg.org/files/2600/2600-0.txt | wc -m
```
Find all occurrences of the word “elementary” in [The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes](https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/1661):
```
curl https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/1661/pg1661.txt | grep -i elementary
```
Questions:
1. What command would you run to get the number of times someone said thanks on IRC, but on all days in August?
2. The documents/vehicles file contains a list of cars and their owners. How many vehicles listed are of make “Toyota”? What command(s) did you use to figure this out?
3. How many log entries related to `Ubuntu` are in the apache logfile? What about Kali linux?
4. Scenario: you remember being in the Ubuntu chatroom when a user named “tomreyn” posted a useful link to a Github issue (you remember that the issue number was 16, but you don’t remember the repository name). Can you find what you’re looking for in the logs?
