---
title: Lab 4 - Processes and Services
layout: lab
facilitator: Owen Thompson
nav_exclude: true
---

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---

## Overview
For this lab, we are going to dive into processes and systemd. We will do this by writing our own systemd service from scratch, while showing the benefits of running a service with systemd. This lab should be completed on your Linux VM.

## Part 0: Set up networking
Before you start this lab, you'll need to make sure you can access services from your VM in your web browser!

The process for doing so is different for each platform. Here are some links relating to port-forwarding for accessing SSH:
 - [Port forwarding on VirtualBox](https://nsrc.org/workshops/2014/sanog23-virtualization/raw-attachment/wiki/Agenda/ex-virtualbox-portforward-ssh.htm)
 - [Port forwarding on UTM](https://medium.com/@lizrice/linux-vms-on-an-m1-based-mac-with-vscode-and-utm-d73e7cb06133)


**You will need to forward the following ports to complete this lab:**
 - 80
 - 420
 - 5000

The above ports should be the *host port*, and can be mapped to any *client port* of your choosing. As an example, if the host port `80` is forwarded to client port `7979`, then accessing `localhost:7979` on your laptop will access the service running on `localhost:80` inside your VM.

## Part 1: Using systemd
### What services are running right now?
Run `systemctl`. You'll see a long table of every unit known to systemd.
Let's narrow it down to services for now. Run `systemctl --type=service`. Now you can see a list of all services running on your computer. Each of these services is a daemon running in the background. Do you see any familiar services running?

**Question 1:** What is the name of a systemd service running on your system? What does it do? (If you're not sure what it does, Google it!)

### Controlling Services
Now let's use `systemd` to control a an nginx web server. If you don't have it already, install nginx by issuing `sudo apt install nginx`. Once that is done we can tell systemd to start the service with the following: `sudo systemctl start nginx`. Run `systemctl status nginx` to ensure it is running.

> Note: If you already have a webserver running, you may need to
> shut it down, so that port 80 is available for nginx to use.

Now let's make nginx listen for connections on the nonstandard port 420. In `/etc/nginx/sites-available/default` change the following lines:

```nginx
listen 80 default_server;
listen [::]:80 default_server;
```

to:

```nginx
listen 420 default_server;
listen [::]:420 default_server;
```

> TIP: The first line configures the server to listen on _IPv4_, and
> the second line configures _IPv6_.

Tell systemd that nginx has changed configuration and needs reloading with: `sudo systemctl reload nginx`.
(Once again, you may need to allow port 420 through your firewall.)
Now, accessing http://localhost:80 should now give you a connection refused error and your webserver will only be accessible via http://localhost:420.

Note that not all services can be reloaded; systemd will notify you if this is the case and such services will have to be restarted instead with: `sudo systemctl restart yourservice`.

Finally go ahead and stop the nginx service with `sudo systemctl stop nginx`.

**Question 2:** What is the difference between `systemctl reload yourservice` and `systemctl restart yourservice`?

**Question 3:** Upload a screenshot of your browser accessing the nginx webserver at http://localhost:420.
Note: If port forwarding is not working for you use `curl localhost:420` and paste it's contents (it should be a html page).

### Creating a service
Let's set up a web server and create a systemd unit for it. Make sure `git` is installed; if it's not, install it using `apt`.

If you don't already have the decal-labs repo from a past lab, run the following:

```
$ git clone https://github.com/0xcf/decal-labs
```

The materials for this part of the lab will be in the `decal-labs/4` directory.
We will also need to install some dependencies. Go ahead and execute the following commands:

```
# apt update
# apt install build-essential make python3-virtualenv
```

Now run `./run`. This should start up a simple web server at http://localhost:5000. (Or whatever port you forwarded it to.)

Your mission, should you choose to accept it, is to write a systemd service that manages this web server. To do this, make a new unit file in `/etc/systemd/system/toy.service`. Refer to the slides for an example; DigitalOcean also has a [good guide](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/understanding-systemd-units-and-unit-files) on how to write systemd units. Here is a skeleton; all you need to do is fill in the values for each field.

```systemd
[Unit]
Description=
Requires=
After=

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target

[Service]
ExecStart=
User=
```

Some questions worth considering while writing this unit file are:
* What units needs to be started before a webserver starts? (Hint: you can get a list of special "target" units using `systemctl --type=target`.)
* What script should systemd run to start the webserver?
* Units run by root as default. Is that a safe practice for web servers?

You are encouraged to experiment with other fields as suits your liking.
Once you have finished creating `toy.service`, let's start the service and have the it start whenever our machine is booted.

```
# systemctl start toy.service
# systemctl enable toy.service
```

### Debugging
You can check if the unit file succeeded by running `systemctl status toy.service`. If you are having issues with the unit file or the web server, check the logs for this unit by running `journalctl -u toy.service`.  If you run into errors don't get demoralized (it is, after all, only a decal); as a sysadmin you'll have to become comfortable making sense of arcane error messages.

> TIP: You can omit the `.service` in `systemctl` command for
> speed. If the unit is another type (e.g. target, socket, or timer),
> you must include the type. We include the `.service` for clarity.

### Crash the service!
One of the great benefits of using systemd to manage your services is that you don't have to worry unnecessarily about bringing a process back up if it crashes. So let's crash the service! You can do this by either sending a POST request with the json payload `{"crash":"true"}` to http://localhost:5000/crash (Hint: use `cURL`) or by killing the webserver manually by sending a signal -- both will cause the unit to crash. You can verify if you succeeded by running `systemctl status toy.service`, and the unit should either be in an `inactive` or `failed` state, depending on how you killed it.

**Question 4:** What command did you run to crash the service?

Now add the following the `/etc/systemd/system/toy.service` under the `Service` directive:

```systemd
Restart=always
RestartSec=10
```

To tell systemd that the unit file has changed run `sudo systemctl daemon-reload`. Now start your webserver and crash it again in any way you please, and you should see that it come back online after 10 seconds! Note that you can also run `daemon-reload` and change a unit file while a service is running.

**Question 5:** Upload your fully featured `toy.service` file to Gradescope.

## Part 2: Processes
**There are no Gradescope questions to answer for this section, but you should still go through the steps to make sure you understand processes and how to use htop!**

Open up a terminal and run the `ps` command. You should see something like this: 

```
  PID TTY          TIME CMD
 3371 pts/2    00:00:00 zsh
 3416 pts/2    00:00:00 ps
```

Now open up **another** terminal and run `sleep 1000 &`, which start a sleeping process in the background. Then run `ps`. It should look like:

```
~
❯ sleep 100 &
[1] 3726

~
❯ ps
  PID TTY          TIME CMD
 3371 pts/2    00:00:00 zsh
 3726 pts/2    00:00:00 sleep
 3752 pts/2    00:00:00 ps
```

In the **first** terminal run `ps` again. You should notice that the `sleep` process is not showing up, even though the thousand seconds haven’t expired. 

Why do you think this behavior occurs (hint: TTY column)?

We can get the process to display on the first terminal by running `ps -u`, which displays all the processes running as your user. Notice the PID column; each process has a unique ID assigned to it by the kernel. One thing we can do with this PID is send signals to the process. `sleep 1000` is pretty useless, so go ahead and kill it – `kill 3726` (substitute `3726` with whatever PID `ps` outputted for you).

The most common use of `ps` is to run `ps -ef` to see all the processes running on the system. Run `ps -e` and `ps -f` independently to see how the flags work together.

### htop

Make sure `htop` is installed by running `sudo apt install htop`. Now, open up a terminal and run the `htop` command. `htop` can be thought of as a more extensive version of `ps -ef`, whereby process stats are updated in real-time.

First press `<F2>`, scroll down to Display options, and check “Hide userland process threads.” We won’t be dealing with those in this lab.

Now open up another terminal (or use `tmux`). Run the command `yes`. It uses a lot of resources as it prints a continuous stream of `y`’s.

What resource specifically does the `yes` command exhaust? If you are having trouble finding this, press `<` to choose which resource to order processes by. Make sure to quit out of `yes` (^C) once you are finished.

### The process hierarchy

Run `htop` once more. This time click `<F5>` to enter Tree View. You should see a visual representation of the process hierarchy on your system, with everything stemming from `/sbin/init` (systemd).

For curious students that are interested in seeing a more extensive process hierarchy on a large system, you are encouraged to run `htop` on the OCF server `tsunami`. Let us know of any cool processes that you find!

### Orphan processes

Open a second terminal and `ssh` to your VM. Now run `sleep 1000 &`. You should see this new process pop into your `htop` session on your first terminal. If not, press `<F3>` and search for “sleep.” What is its parent?

Select this parent and press `<F9>` to kill it. Send the `SIGTERM` signal. The sleep process now has `init` as its new parent, which is PID 1\. What you just did is manually orphan a process; when that happens said process is subsequently re-parented by the `init` process.

Now go through the same steps again. This time, send the parent a `SIGHUP` (hangup) signal. Can you still find the sleep process? When `SIGHUP` is sent to a parent shell, the parent subsequently sends hangup signals to any child processes before terminating; all processes that receive `SIGHUP` from a parent shell will terminate – this is one way to avoid creating orphan processes.

If you are interested in learning about the different signals, run `man 7 signal`. Note that you can run `man man` for an explanation about the different manual section numbers.

## Exploration
Congratulations, you have completed the lab! This is just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to processes and services. If you want to learn more, here are some related topics you can look into.
- [Wikipedia's article on init systems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Init)
- [The construction of a basic init system](https://felipec.wordpress.com/2013/11/04/init/)
- [Yelp's dumb-init, a lightweight init system for docker containers](https://engineeringblog.yelp.com/2016/01/dumb-init-an-init-for-docker.html)
- [Zombie Processes](https://www.howtogeek.com/119815/htg-explains-what-is-a-zombie-process-on-linux/)
- [Socket activation](http://0pointer.de/blog/projects/socket-activated-containers.html)
- Systemd has been the source of a considerable amount of controversy. [Opponents](http://without-systemd.org/wiki/index.php/Main_Page) allege that it violates the Unix philosophy of “do one thing and do it well”, and that it has had too much scope creep, among other complaints.
- Everything you wanted to know about Unix [threads, processes, process groups and sessions](https://www.win.tue.nl/~aeb/linux/lk/lk-10.html). Bear in mind that this document is a little dated when it comes to the code about threads, and its description of what happens when a pseudotty is closed is not actually correct.

## Submission

Go to Gradescope to submit your answers!
