---
title: Lab 8 - Web Application
layout: lab
---

## Overview

We’re going to set up a flask app. And we are going to call it [basicapp]

There is 3 main component to this lab. We will install Nginx, uWSGI, and flask through apt. Then we will git clone an example app and config files from my repository. Next, we will modify the configuration file. If configured correctly, we'll go through the startup procedure. We'll end it with some debugging tips and tricks. 

### The Setup

We need virtualenv and git for staging. Run

`apt install virtualenv git`

Next, we'll create the directory where our project will be located. We'll just call it [basicapp] and we'll place it in /opt/. 

`mkdir /opt/basicapp`

Next, we'll set up our virturalenv. Virtualenv is a python tool that lets you create a custom python execution environment that is specific to your project. This is so dependencies or modified libraries does not pollute your main coding environment. Let's create the virtualenv for this project and activate it. 

`cd /opt/[basicapp]
virtualenv venv
source venv/bin/activate
`
You can see a (venv) in the beginning of your prompt. Now all your python code will execute the venv version of python. Located in "/opt/[basicapp]/venv/bin/python". And it'll add venv to top of your python path, that means your python library will search venv first before search global library directory. 

Let's git clone from my repository. It contains a very basic flask app and very standard config file for Nginx and uwsgi. 

`git clone https://github.com/doku/basic_flask_demo.git`

Inside the directory, there is a requirements.txt file. This is a list of my python libraries for my flask app. Let's install it.

`pip install -r requirements.txt`

The only package I installed was flask. The rest was dependencies. You should have the same results if you run the following.

`pip install flask`

Notice, these packages are installed into your venv directory. They are only available if your virtual environment is activated. Unless your global also has the same packages.

### Three Servers

Let's test your basicapp.py. 

`python basicapp.py`

In your browser, go to your server domain with port 5000. [sysadmindecaldomain.decal.berkeley.edu:5000] You should see "Hello from Flask!" on your browser. You can change ports on this development server by editing basicapp.py file. In the line "app.run()", try adding argument port=5001, or debug=True. Control-C to exit.

To get our uWSGI running, let's install it through apt.

`apt install uwsgi uwsgi-plugin-python`

Next, we need to edit basicapp.ini, your uWSGI config file. Then we'll move it to a location accessible to the uwsgi server. 

Check uwsgi.py exist in your directory. This file contains your callable function app. This is called by uWSGI to reach your app. In your config file, look for 'wsgi-file' variable. Change the file if you need to. The 'callable' variable should be set to the app. Equivalently, 'module = basicapp:app' should give you the same result. 

The 'chdir' variable should be set to your project directory. uWSGI upon startup will change the working directory to the assigned location. Any other relative file path will be relative to this location. 

If you have project name different than [basicapp], change every instance of [basicapp] to your app name. 

Both 'pythonpath' and 'virtualenv' helps uWSGI to find the right packages.

In Debian based systems, Apache2 and Nginx are assigned 'www-data' for their user and group. In our uwsgi config, we set 'gid' and 'uid' to 'www-data'. That way when systemd runs the startup script, it would know what user and group to set uWSGI process to.  

'master = true' respawns processes when if they die. uWSGI starts a master processes that spawn application server processes, and it monitors these children processes in case of failure.

'processes' and 'threads' tells uWSGI the number of processes to spawn and how many threads per processes. It's arbitrary set at this point. It should increase as your application demand increase, up to system resource limit. 

'socket' is where uWSGI and Nginx communicates. It can be Unix sockets or internet sockets. As long as nginx is set to the same location. Right now, 0.0.0.0:8370 is set. The IP 0.0.0.0 tells the uWSGI server to attach to no specific IP. That means it's accessible from anywhere in the network. It can be used to communicate reverse proxy located on a different server.

For testing purposes, lets comment out the socket line. And add a line for http-socket. 

`http-socket = :8370`

Save this file and we run uWSGI with this configuration. First, check if a uwsgi process is already running. If so kill it. Either by `systemctl stop uwsgi` or `kill -9` 

`uwsgi --ini basicapp.ini`

You should be able to see your app running on port 8370. (ports I choose is arbitrary, Just as long as it's not occupied by another process) 

If you do not see your flask app, it might be because we have not changed our project folder owner and groups yet. Change the folder group to 'www-data'. And chmod with a group read, write, and execute permission. You might be ok not giving the group write permission. Unless you know your app writes a file to directory, like profile image upload feature. Rerun uwsgi after the changes.

First kill uWSGI processes. I use `ps aux | grep uwsgi` to locate the process, and `kill -9 [pid]` to kill the process or use top/htop. You might notice only killing one of the processes is effective. That's the master process respawning the server back up. Kill the smallest PID process.

If you see your app running in the browser, change the config file back to socket. Comment out `http-socket` and add line `socket = 127.0.0.1:8370`. This binds the server localhost, so only services within the physical server itself can access this port. 

To make this file accessible to the uwsgi server at startup, let's put it in the default config location in "/etc/uwsgi/app-available/" and symbolic link it to "/etc/uwsgi/app-enabled/".

`
mv /opt/[basicapp]/[basicapp].ini /etc/uwsgi/app-available/
ln -s /etc/uwsgi/app-available/[basicapp].ini /etc/uwsgi/app-enabled/[basicapp].ini
`
Let's also touch the log file just so we have it. 

`touch /opt/[basicapp]/[basicapp].log`

Start uWSGI server. This time we'll use systemctl to start the server. First, make sure all uwsgi process is killed. Then in command prompt type.

`systemctl start uwsgi`

Check for uwsgi processes. Check the logs.

`tail -n 15 /var/log/uwsgi/app/[basicapp].log`

Decipher if it's working or not.

### Nginx

Nginx by default serves to port 80. To avoid conflicts, let's shut down other services running on port 80. Or you can modify nginx's default config file. First, install Nginx. Run the command if you're not sure.

`apt install nginx`

We'll edit the config file from GitHub then move it to the right location. First, let's go over some of the configuration options for '[basicapp].conf'.

For the line "listen 80;", change it to your desired [port]. 

    
    #for a public HTTP server:
    listen [port];
    
In line 6, 

`#server_name localhost ...;`

Change it to your server domain. 

On line 10,

`uwsgi_pass 127.0.0.1:[port]`

Change the port to your uwsgi port from steps above. 

On line 24 and 27 with alias,

    ` 23     location /static {
      24         alias /opt/basicapp/static;
      25     }
      26     location /favicon.ico {
      27         alias /opt/basicapp/static/favicon.ico;
      28     }
      `
Change alias file directory to your app directory. 

Move the file and make a symbolic link, aka soft link.

`
mv /opt/[basicapp]/[basicapp].conf /etc/nginx/sites-available/
ln -s /etc/nginx/sites-available/[basicapp].conf /etc/nginx/sites-enabled/[basicapp].conf
`
It may or may not matter if you change the owner and permission of that file.

Let's start nginx.

`systemctl start nginx`

The systemd starts nginx upon install. Instead lets run

`
systemctl restart nginx
`
If all is running, Check your server on the browser with the port you set. 


Useful commands and locations for debugging

    Tail -n 15 /var/log/syslog
    /var/log/syslog
    /var/log/nginx/error.log
    /var/log/uwsgi/emperor.log
    Journalctl -xf

Unix socket debug

    uwsgi --connect-and-read

### Challange

Here's a flask app I found on github.

https://github.com/pallets/flask/tree/master/examples/flaskr
https://github.com/akprasad/flask-forum
https://github.com/codelucas/flask_reddit
https://github.com/vinceprignano/chatapp
https://github.com/rochacbruno/quokka_ng

Make a uwsgi.py file
Make a flaskr.ini file for uwsgi
Put it in apps-available
Make a flaskr.conf file for Nginx
Put it in sites-available

Make one run!




https://uwsgi-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Options.html
    


references

https://github.com/humiaozuzu/awesome-flask#build_with_flask

https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-deploy-python-wsgi-applications-using-uwsgi-web-server-with-nginx
https://nginx.org/en/docs/
http://flask.pocoo.org/docs/0.12/

https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-serve-flask-applications-with-uwsgi-and-nginx-on-ubuntu-16-04

http://uwsgi-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Nginx.html





