---
title: Advanced Lab 3 - Pre-install Setup and Installation
layout: lab
nav_exclude: true
---

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---


## A preliminary message (read this section carefully!)

In this lab we will be installing Arch Linux into a virtual machine.
In this lab you will need to **pay close attention to detail:** mistakes
may not be apparent for quite a while later, and can cause _huge_
headaches. As always, make sure to take advantage of #decal-general and other
resources if you need help! Also, in this lab, the
[ArchWiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org) will be an invaluable resource
that we will be referencing a lot.

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> Throughout the lab, additional notes will be formatted like this.
> These notes are the _only_ sections of the lab that you can safely
> skip. They will provide additional interesting information and
> context, so I recommend reading them anyway!
</div>

As always, you will need to submit this lab on Gradescope. Any time
you see "**GRADESCOPE:**" in this lab, stop and make sure that you
have submitted the relevant answer or output to Gradescope. In most
cases, it will be **hard or impossible** to go back and get the answer
later in the lab. **If you realize you forgot to submit something,
do not worry! Simply explain what you did / what command you ran
rather than restarting.**

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> We chose to install Arch Linux in this lab for a few reasons. First,
> Arch Linux gives you tools to handle monotonous tasks (like
> `genfstab`, which does the dirty work of writing out `/etc/fstab`)
> while leaving the more complicated and more customizable tasks to
> you. Second, Arch is widely used and experience with Arch can
> usually be applied to other distributions as well. Third,
> ArchWiki. Seriously. It's that good.
</div>

**Make sure you allocate about 2 hours for this lab (don't do it last minute!)** Trying to rush the process may result in skipping over key details and could require you to restart. That being said though, it ideally shouldn't take much longer than that. **If you've had to restart multiple times or have otherwise tried for a long time with no success, contact staff.** We don't want you to get stuck for 6 hours etc.

## Setup

We will be setting up virtual machine _inside_ your student VM.

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> Yes, this is a "nested" virtual machine.
</div>

First, connect to your student VM using the credentials that were
emailed to you. If you haven't yet, you will need to reset your
password when you first log in. Please use a [safe
password](https://xkcd.com/936) and don't lose it!

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> If you're enrolled in this DeCal, you should have a student VM. If
> you're not, we can't guarantee that these techniques will work on
> other systems (for a variety of reasons). However, you can obtain a
> system that's very similar to a student VM by creating a Droplet on
> DigitalOcean. Normally this Droplet would cost some amount of money,
> but you can get free DigitalOcean credits by using the [GitHub
> Student Developer Pack](https://education.github.com/pack). You can
> follow [the instructions on the DigitalOcean
> website](https://www.digitalocean.com/docs/droplets/how-to/create/)
> to create the Droplet. When selecting an image, choose Ubuntu 18.04.
</div>

**PLEASE READ**: Before you begin, please upgrade packages/reboot Ubuntu on
your Digital Ocean droplet if prompted to do so by the motd (Message
of the Day; the text you see when you `ssh` into your DO droplet),
but **do not upgrade to Ubuntu 20.04 (do not run the command
`do-release-upgrade`)**. In other words, before starting the lab,
run `sudo apt update`, then `sudo apt upgrade`, and finally `sudo
reboot`. You will lose connection when your DO droplet reboots, then
`ssh` back in and begin the lab.

Now that you are connected to your student VM, we will need to install
some packages that will allow us to create our nested Arch Linux VM.
Run

```sh
sudo apt install --no-install-recommends qemu-kvm qemu-utils libvirt-bin virtinst ovmf
```
<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> QEMU is a system for running virtual machines, and it can use KVM,
> which is a kernel module that supports the virtualization under the
> hood. We can install this with the package `qemu-kvm`. `libvirt`
> (installed via `libvirt-bin`) is a system for managing these
> QEMU/KVM virtual machines. `qemu-utils` provides necessary tools for
> creating virtual drives, and is used by `virt-install`. `virtinst`
> will provide the script `virt-install`, which we will use to create
> the virtual machine. We add `--no-install-recommends` because
> `virtinst` has a recommended dependency `virt-viewer`, which depends
> on the [X11 system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X_Window_System).
> However, this is a lot of packages that are only useful if we have a
> GUI (which we don't!) so we want to skip recommended dependencies.
> Finally, `ovmf` is an additional library that will let us use
> [UEFI](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Unified_Extensible_Firmware_Interface)
> (instead of the older BIOS spec) to boot the VM.
</div>

### Acquire installation media

Next, we need to get the installation media. Go to
https://mirrors.ocf.berkeley.edu/archlinux/iso/latest/ to find the latest Arch
release. Using the `wget` command within your VM, download the `.iso` file found
within this directory as well as the `.iso.sig` signature file that we will use
to verify the authenticity of the `.iso` file. For example, the current release
at the time of writing is `2021.02.01`, so you would run the following commands:

```sh
wget 'https://mirrors.ocf.berkeley.edu/archlinux/iso/latest/archlinux-2021.02.01-x86_64.iso'
wget 'https://mirrors.ocf.berkeley.edu/archlinux/iso/latest/archlinux-2021.02.01-x86_64.iso.sig'
```
Note that Arch is a ["rolling
release"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rolling_release) distribution (as
opposed to distros like Ubuntu that release distinct versions e.g. Ubuntu 18.04,
Ubuntu 20.04), so it is updated frequently. Therefore, the links used above are
likely out of date by the time you're reading this! Make sure to find the
correct files for the latest release, do not just copy and paste the commands
above.

You can run `ls` to see the two files that were downloaded.

Notice that we are downloading this from the OCF software mirrors
(`mirrors.ocf.berkeley.edu`). There's nothing stopping the OCF from
modifying the `.iso` file and inserting malicious code that will end
up running on our machine. To avoid this, we need to verify that the
signature we downloaded is valid, and matches the file we downloaded.
For more info, see
[https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Installation_guide#Verify_signature](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Installation_guide#Verify_signature).

To verify the signature, run `gpg --keyserver-options
auto-key-retrieve --verify file.sig`, replacing `file.sig` with the
downloaded `.sig` file. You'll see information about who created this
signature. We want to know that this signature is from an Arch Linux
developer. To be pretty confident of that, go to
[https://www.archlinux.org/people/developers/](https://www.archlinux.org/people/developers/)
and find the developer who is said to have created this
signature. Under their info click on the link that says "PGP
Key". You'll see a bunch of info about their PGP key. Check that the
"Fingerprint" listed near the top of this page matches the "Primary
key fingerprint" in the `gpg` output. If not, something is very
wrong!

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> If the `gpg` commmand above to verify the signature doesn't work,
> try using the OCF's keyserver by appending this to the original
> command: `--keyserver=hkp://pgp.ocf.berkeley.edu`.
</div>

**GRADESCOPE**: Who is the developer that created this signature, and
what is their key's fingerprint?

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> Note that this test is only resilient if www.archlinux.org is _not_
> compromised. To be more confident, you might want to try to find
> this fingerprint somewhere else, or independently verify this key
> somehow. Traditionally this is done via the [web of
> trust](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_of_trust), but new systems
> such as [Keybase](https://keybase.io) are trying to find alternate
> solutions to this fundamental problem of "How do I know you are who
> you say you are?"
</div>

### Create VM

Now, we need to actually create our VM. **_(Don't run this command
until you've read the next paragraph!)_** To do this, you will run

```sh
sudo virt-install --name archvm --memory 704 --cpu host --vcpus 1 --disk size=5 --network network=default --boot uefi --graphics none --cdrom archlinux-2021.02.01-x86_64.iso
```

This will do some initial setup, and then drop us into a virtual
serial console connected to the VM. You'll see some boot options and a
timer. Press `e` to edit the first boot option before the timer runs
out! By default, Arch will not enable the serial console we are
currently using to connect to the VM, so we need to manually add it to
the kernel command line. Once we're editing this command line, hit
`END` to jump to the end of the line and carefully add a space and
then `console=ttyS0`. When you're confident you've typed it right, hit
enter to start booting the kernel.

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> Normally, we use "terminal emulators" (like Terminal or iTerm on
> Mac, or GNOME Terminal or Terminator on Linux) to access the
> console. Alternatively, we can use the console via terminals running
> via a keyboard and display. (To see this, hit `ctrl-alt-F1` on an
> OCF lab computer. Hit `ctrl-alt-F7` to get back to the GUI.) The
> option we are using here is accessing the console via a serial port
> connection, which in the modern age is pretty rare. However, we're
> not using a real serial port of course—since we're using a virtual
> machine, the serial port is also virtualized. libvirt provides
> convenient this convenient tooling to connect to this virtual serial
> port from the console we already have with the host machine (your
> student VM).
</div>

We're communicating with the VM via this virtual serial connection. If
you wanted to detatch from this, you would hit the key combo `ctrl-]`,
and reconnect by running the command `sudo virsh console archvm`.

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> In most cases if you disconnect and have to restart in the middle,
> you can just run `sudo virsh console archvm` to reconnect. If you
> really mess up, you can start things over by stopping the VM
> (`sudo virsh destroy archvm`), deleting the VM
> (`sudo virsh undefine archvm --nvram --remove-all-storage`), and
> then recreating it by starting over from the command above. If for
> some reason, your VM gets turned off before you are done installing
> Arch, it may be possible to reconnect the archiso and reboot the VM
> using the archiso. However, doing this is out of scope for this lab.
</div>

You should start seeing a bunch of lines that start with `[   OK   ]`,
and eventually you will see a login prompt.

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> Since the installation media is basically just a preinstalled Linux
> system that makes it easy to install Linux on another system, this
> is the info about the booting "archiso" system. So, nothing is
> actually installed on the VM yet, but we are booting into a
> temporary Linux system that will help us install Linux permanently
> on the VM.
</div>

Once you see a login prompt, enter `root` as the username, and you
should get in! You're now at the archiso command line.

**GRADESCOPE**: Use the `hostname` command to get the current
hostname. What is it? Then, use `ip addr` to find the current IP
address (look at the `inet` line under `ens2`, it's the stuff at the
beginning of the line, not including the `/24`). What is your IP
address? In another terminal, try to ping this IP address from your
student VM, and then also from tsunami (ssh.ocf.berkeley.edu). Can
either of them reach it?

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> We'll discuss networking, and why you see these results, in a later
> lecture.

> Notice we are booted using UEFI (hence `-boot uefi` in the
> virt-install line). Check out the ArchWiki
> ([https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Installation_guide#Verify_the_boot_mode](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Installation_guide#Verify_the_boot_mode))
> for more info. Also, notice that we are already connected to the
> internet! Our virtual network uses DHCP, and the archiso knows to
> try to autoconfigure using DHCP. We will talk more about DHCP and
> other networking configuration later in the course. Finally, notice
> that we've conveniently inherited the system clock, so the time
> inside the VM should be right. You can run `date` to see.
</div>

## Partitioning time

The first order of business is to set up the
[partitions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disk_partitioning) that we will be
using for this installation. We are going to use a simple partition scheme:
- an EFI system partition (ESP)
- one encrypted partition that holds our root filesystem
- a small partition for swap space

This is a very common scheme and is totally a scheme you could use if
you were installing Arch on your own computer (except that you'll
hopefully have more than 5GiB to work with)!

**GRADESCOPE**: Give a brief and basic explanation of the purpose of having (1)
the EFI system partition and (2) the swap partition. These explanations can be
as short as one sentence, just try to get a general sense of why we have these
partitions.

### Create partitions

We will use [`fdisk`](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Fdisk) to create our
partitions. Before we start the actual partitioning process, run `fdisk -l`. You
should see that your VM has a single storage device called `/dev/sda`. Linux has
special [device files](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Device_file) that
correspond to each "block device" (e.g. hard drives, SSDs, and partitions on the
aformentioned storage devices) discovered by the operating system. These device
files live in the `/dev` folder. Read more about the naming convention for
storage devices and their partitions
[here](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Device_file#Block_device_names).

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> Test your understanding: What would be the name of the device file
> corresponding to the fourth partition on the second discovered storage device?
</div>

Now to start the actual partitioning process, run `fdisk /dev/sda`.

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> Note that you'll be making a bunch of changes to the partition table, but
> these changes are not made immediately. So, if you make a mistake, you can
> just start again from step 1 without damaging anything.
</div>

1. Create a GPT table by typing `g` (then hit enter).
2. Create your ESP by typing `n`. Use the default partition number and
   first sector (just hit enter to automatically take the default).
   For the last sector, type `+512M` to allocate 512MiB for the
   partition.
3. Type `t` to change the type of the new partition (partition 1) to
   "EFI System". You will have to list the types and find the right
   ID. (Note: press `q` to get out of the list of filesystem types).
4. Create your main root partition by typing `n` again. Use the
   default partition number and first sector. To leave 512MiB at the
   end of the disk for our swap partition, type `-512M` for the last
   sector. (This partition should already have the correct type,
   "Linux filesystem", so you won't need to change that.)
5. Create your swap partition by typing `n` one last time, and just
   take all the defaults.
6. Type `t` to change the type of the swap partition (partition 3) to
   "Linux swap", as in step 3.
7. Type `p` to show the current partition table with all the changes
   you've made. You should see an "EFI System" partition that is
   512MiB, a "Linux filesystem" partition that is 4GiB, and a "Linux
   swap" partition that is 512MiB.
8. If everything looks right, type `w` to finally actually write the
   changes to disk.

At this point, `fdisk` should exit.

**GRADESCOPE**: To see your final results, run `fdisk -l /dev/sda` and
paste the output into Gradescope.

At this point, you've created the disk partitions, but nothing is on
them yet. Now we need to put the filesystems you will use on these
partitions!

### Create filesystems

#### ESP

The ESP (EFI System Partition) has to be in a FAT format. For more
information about the ESP, see
[https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/EFI_system_partition](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/EFI_system_partition).

Your ESP should be `/dev/sda1` (refer back to output from
`fdisk -l /dev/sda`). Run `mkfs.fat -F32 /dev/sda1` to create the
FAT32 filesystem.

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> These instructions are straight from
> [https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/EFI_system_partition#Format_the_partition](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/EFI_system_partition#Format_the_partition).
</div>

#### Root partition

Our root partition should be `/dev/sda2`.

We are going to encrypt the root partition. This makes things a bit
more complicated, but thankfully the ArchWiki will help us out!

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> Encryption is basically essentially in modern devices. If you do not
> encrypt your drive, anyone who has access to that drive can simply
> take it out of your machine and read everything on it. Your account
> password doesn't protect against anything. However, if you do use
> encryption, you will not be able to get anything off the disk at all
> without the encryption password.
</div>

##### Setting up the encrypted device

These instructions are based on the ArchWiki. [Follow
along!](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Dm-crypt/Encrypting_an_entire_system#LUKS_on_a_partition)

First, set up the encrypted partition. For this lab, use the
encryption passphrase `ilovelinux`.

```sh
cryptsetup -y -v luksFormat /dev/sda2
```

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> A note on passphrases: don't use a passphrase like this! A good way
> to come up with passphrases is just to take 6 random words (and I
> mean actually random, not like
> [xkcd.com/1210](https://xkcd.com/1210) random). One way to generate
> such a password is the command `shuf -n 6 /usr/share/dict/words`
> (you might have to install a package like `wamerican` on
> Ubuntu/Debian or `words` on Arch). We will talk more about security
> (including password security) later in the course.
</div>

Now that the encrypted partition has been created, let's open it!

```sh
cryptsetup open /dev/sda2 cryptroot
```

**GRADESCOPE**: Run `lsblk` to see the hierarchy of these partitions.
Paste this output into Gradescope!

##### Creating the actual filesystem

We now have a blank pseudo-partition ("block device")
`/dev/mapper/cryptroot`, that's actually backed by encrypted
`/dev/sda2` disk partition. However, there's no filesystem here
yet. Create it by doing

```sh
mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/cryptroot
```

**GRADESCOPE**: What previous command we ran is similar to this
command, and what's the difference? (Bonus: why?)

#### Swap

Our swap partition should be `/dev/sda3`. The swap space isn't really
a _filesystem_, but we still need to set it up. Thankfully, this is
pretty straightforward:


```sh
mkswap /dev/sda3
```

Then, enable it with

```sh
swapon /dev/sda3
```

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> If you don't know about swap, it is basically a specially designated
> section of disk that the operating system can use as memory in case
> it runs out of actual memory. For more info, check out
> [https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Swap](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Swap).
</div>


### Mount the new filesystems

We've now created all our filesystems, but in order to access them, we
need to mount them.

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> What does mounting mean? The `man` page for the `mount` command provides a
> nice description: "All files accessible in a Unix system are arranged in one
> big tree, the file hierarchy, rooted at /. These files can be spread out over
> several devices. The mount command serves to attach the filesystem found on
> some device to the big file tree. Conversely, the umount(8) command will
> detach it again." We are currently in the "file tree" of the Arch live
> environment, which does not include the new ESP and root filesystems we
> created for our future Arch installation. Using `mount`, we can attach these
> filesystems to our live environment filesystem and access them as if they were
> directories at the mount point. Once the ESP and root filesystems are visible
> to the current filesystem, we can start installing a boot loader to the ESP
> filesystem and our permanent Arch OS to the root filesystem.
</div>

We're going to use `/mnt` as the temporary root of the new Arch installation.
Thus, we mount the root filesystem at `/mnt`, and the ESP at `/mnt/boot` (since
the ESP will normally be mounted at `/boot`). Hopefully this will make a little
more sense once we begin installing the system.

```sh
mount /dev/mapper/cryptroot /mnt
mkdir /mnt/boot
mount /dev/sda1 /mnt/boot
```

**GRADESCOPE**:

1. You can see every single filesystem that's currently mounted by running the
   `mount` command. Run it, and look for the two filesystems we just mounted.
   Copy all the output over to Gradescope.

2. Another common Linux partitioning scheme is to have a separate `/home`
   partition in addition to the partitions we created above. This can be useful
   in case something goes catastrophically wrong with your operating system to
   the point where you need to reinstall it. You can wipe your root filesystem
   and reinstall your OS while leaving your `/home` partition untouched, saving
   your user folder(s) with personal files like documents and photos without
   needing to restore from a backup. Hypothetically, if we had made a separate
   `/home` partition and filesystem in the previous steps, what command(s) would
   we need to run to mount it? Assume the `/home` partition is `/dev/sda3`.

## Installation

With our partitions all set up and ready to get going, we can start
installing out system onto them!

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> Much of this will be straight from the ArchWiki installation guide,
> starting at
> [https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Installation_guide#Installation](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Installation_guide#Installation).
> It's a good idea to follow along there as well to see what
> modifications we are making.
</div>

### Mirrors

We need to tell Arch which software mirror to use when downloading
packages. Go ahead and just put the OCF mirror at the top! Edit
`/etc/pacman.d/mirrorlist` using `vim`/`emacs`/`nano` and put the
following line at the top:

```
Server = https://mirrors.ocf.berkeley.edu/archlinux/$repo/os/$arch
```

(We're usually lower down in the file but putting us at the top will
make things a bit faster to install.)

### Continue according to ArchWiki!

Follow the arch wiki exactly from
[https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Installation_guide#Install_essential_packages](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Installation_guide#Install_essential_packages)
down until you get to the "Initramfs" section. If you get stuck, check out the
following hints:

- `vim` is not installed in the chroot by default. You can do
  `pacman -S vim` to install it, or just use plain old `vi`.
- Our timezone is `America/Los_Angeles`.
- The locale you want to use is `en_US.UTF-8`.
- You shouldn't need to change the keyboard layout.
- You can pick whatever you want for your hostname. OCF machines are
  all named after "disasters", so it can be fun to come up with a
  creative name that fit that theme.

### initramfs

The initramfs is the minimal stuff that's loaded into RAM that helps
Linux get started when you first boot. On Arch, there's a system to
generate this initramfs. You need to tell it to support disk
encryption.

Based on the [ArchWiki's
instructions](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Dm-crypt/Encrypting_an_entire_system#Configuring_mkinitcpio),
we need to edit `/etc/mkinitcpio.conf`. You should see a line like

```
HOOKS=(base udev autodetect ...)
```

We need to add the `keymap` and `encrypt` hooks, and move the
`keyboard` hook earlier in the line. When you're done, it should look
like

```
HOOKS=(base udev autodetect keyboard keymap modconf block encrypt filesystems fsck)
```

The _order_ of these hooks matters! Be careful.

Run `mkinitcpio -p linux` to generate the new initramfs based on the
new config file.

### Root password

Use `passwd` to set the root password to `itoolovelinux`.

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> As mentioned for the disk encryption passphrase, don't use a
> password like this in real life! Choose a strong root password using
> a method like the one from earlier. User programs shouldn't be able
> to compromise this password, because it would allow a single program
> (which should generally be untrusted) to access everything on your
> computer.
</div>

### Boot loader

Historically, GRUB has been the only reasonable choice of boot loader. However,
with the advent of UEFI, there are lots of different good options (or my
personal favorite, [no bootloader at
all](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/EFISTUB#Using_UEFI_directly)). In this
lab, we are going to use
[systemd-boot](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Systemd-boot).

We can install systemd-boot to our ESP by running

```sh
bootctl --path=/boot install
```

We now need to tell systemd-boot that our Arch Linux installation
exists and how to start it! Create a bootloader entry by creating the file
`/boot/loader/entries/arch.conf` with these contents:

```
title   Arch Linux
linux   /vmlinuz-linux
initrd  /initramfs-linux.img
options cryptdevice=UUID=290d6a44-2964-48a0-a71e-ea3df0525987:cryptroot root=/dev/mapper/cryptroot rw console=ttyS0
```

**IMPORTANT NOTE:** You will need to replace
`290d6a44-2964-48a0-a71e-ea3df0525987` with the correct UUID for your
encrypted `/dev/sda2` partition. To find the correct UUID, run `ls -l
/dev/disk/by-uuid` and look for the line with `-> ../../sda2`. This
line will have the UUID you need. **If you make a mistake here, you
can mess things up pretty bad! TRIPLE-CHECK this file!**

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> We could use a name like `/dev/sda2` instead of
> `UUID=290d6a44-2964-48a0-a71e-ea3df0525987` here. However, these
> names like `/dev/sdXX` are not guaranteed to always be the same. A
> kernel update or hardware changes can mean that `/dev/sda2` is now
> `/dev/sdb2`, or vice versa. This will mean we won't be able to boot,
> and in particularly bad cases, can lead to data loss. For this
> reason, we should use UUIDs whenever possible, because they cannot
> change. See
> [https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Persistent_block_device_naming](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Persistent_block_device_naming)
> for more info about this.

> Also, remember how we had to add `console=ttyS0` when we first
> booted the archiso? We can add that option here to make it permanent
> for the new system, so the console will always be enabled.
</div>

Type `exit` to exit the chroot and then type `reboot` to REBOOT AND
FINISH THE INSTALLATION! Congrats!

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

> If things don't work after you reboot, don't panic! Please make a
> Ask for help on #decal-general, and we will try to help you
> recover things.
</div>

When it reboots, you will be asked for the disk encryption password,
and then you should see a login prompt. Log in as root using the
password you set!

**GRADESCOPE**: To show off your newly installed Arch system, run the
following commands and paste the output into Gradescope:
```
hostname -f
ip addr
mount
lsblk
uname -a
```

**Debugging Note:** If the `hostname` command is not found, you may need to install it by running `sudo pacman -S inetutils`. Doing so may also reveal that your internet connection is not yet configured. If this is the case, then you will likely need to `sudo systemctl enable systemd-resolved` and/or `sudo systemctl enable systemd-networkd` and/or `sudo systemctl enable dhcpcd` and/or `ln -sf /run/systemd/resolve/stub-resolv.conf /etc/resolv.conf `. You can see more information about this in the ArchWiki: https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/systemd-networkd

When you are done, you can hit `ctrl-]` to detach your console from
the Arch VM and get back to your normal student VM shell.
