---
title: Lab 4 - Post Install
layout: lab
---

# Generating SSH Keys
Since passwords can be guessed, a secure SSH setup will usually use key-based authentication instead of (or in addition to) a passphrase. You may already have an ssh key, so run the following command to see if you have one:

(note: We won’t give instructions here for Windows machines. To follow these instructions, SSH into `ssh.ocf.berkeley.edu` with your OCF account’s credentials and continue from there)

```
ls .ssh
```

If you see `id_rsa` or `id_edsca` listed, you already have an SSH key. If you don’t, run this command to generate one:


```
ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 4096
```

The `-t` field specifies which encryption algorithm to use. RSA is the most common, but you may also sometimes see ECDSA or DSA. By default, the key will be named based on the algorithm used, but the filename can actually be whatever you'd like. The `-b` field specifies how many bits are in the key-- this doesn't matter too much, but we will use the slightly more secure option of 4096 bits.

Now, run `ls .ssh` again. You should see two files, `id_rsa` and `id_rsa.pub`.

*  `id_rsa` is the private key-- it should never be revealed outside of the machine it’s generated on. Knowledge of this key can be used to enter your server!
* `id_rsa.pub` is the public key. You can safely give it to your friends and/or shout it from the rooftops. If you put it in the `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` folder of a user on a server, you will be able to log in as that user on that server.

Use this command to copy your public key to your decal VM, replacing <user> with your OCF username:


```
ssh-copy-id <user>@<user>.decal.xcf.sh
```

Now ssh into the decal VM (`ssh <user>@<user>.decal.xcf.sh`). If you set an SSH key passphrase, you should be prompted to enter it. If you did not set a passphrase, SSH should log you in immediately.


To see what `ssh-copy-id` did: run `cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub` on your local machine. Then run `cat ~/.ssh/authorized_keys` on your decal VM. You should see your public key listed in `authorized_keys`!

Lab submission question: paste your `id_rsa.pub`

# Install a firewall
We have already set up a firewall outside your VM’s control that prevents connections from outside UC Berkeley’s subnets. However, as an educational exercise you should still install a firewall.

Install UFW. You might find [this guide](https://wiki.debian.org/Uncomplicated%20Firewall%20%28ufw%29) helpful. Ensure the following
* Incoming connections should be forbidden by default
* Incoming connections to port 22 (SSH) should be allowed (otherwise, you’ll be locked out of your VM!)
* (Optional, only necessary if you're running a web server) Incoming connections to ports 80 and 443 (HTTP and HTTPS) should be allowed.

Lab submission question: paste your output of `sudo ufw status verbose`

# Choose your own adventure
From here, your task is to install a useful service on your VM. Here are some suggestions, but feel free to run whatever you’d like. Your submission for this will simply be to explain what you installed, and explain the potential security implications you can think of:

## Music server
Some music enthusiasts opt to own their own music files instead of using a cloud service (Spotify, Google Play Music, etc). But, if the files are only stored on your computer’s hard drive, how can you listen to your music when on someone else’s computer? A music server like CherryMusic can solve this problem while still giving you control over your files. Install [CherryMusic](http://www.fomori.org/cherrymusic/) (or an [alternative](https://github.com/Kickball/awesome-selfhosted#audio-streaming)]) on your DeCal VM, and load up a few tunes.

## Git server
GitHub is a good place to host your source code, but self-hosting your own Git can be a good option if you need to store something private (and don’t trust GitHub), hosting your own can be a good solution. While you can use Git to host a repo on any SSH server using a [bare repo](http://www.saintsjd.com/2011/01/what-is-a-bare-git-repository/), to get a fancy GUI you need to install special software. Some popular options for this include [Gitea](https://gitea.io/en-us/) (which mimicks GitHub’s interface) and [cgit](https://git.zx2c4.com/cgit/about/) (which takes a more minimalist approach). Pick one and install it.

## File hosting
Instead of uploading your files to Google Drive or Dropbox to be shared, you can host on your own VM. A good option for this is [fluffy](https://github.com/chriskuehl/fluffy) (created by an OCF alum!), which also doubles as a pastebin for quickly sharing code snippets. For more options, look at the the [“simple click/drag-n-drop upload” section of awesome-selfhosted](https://github.com/Kickball/awesome-selfhosted#single-clickdrag-n-drop-upload).

## Password manager
[BitWarden](https://blog.bitwarden.com/host-your-own-open-source-password-manager-ace147649936) is a popular self-hosted password manager. You can use it to host your passwords if you don’t want to rely on a proprietary third-party (like LastPass)

## Anything else!
[awesome-selfhosted](https://github.com/Kickball/awesome-selfhosted) on GitHub has lots of options here. Have fun!

Lab submission question: explain what you installed, and the potential security considerations.

