---
title: Lab 8 - Configuration Management
layout: lab
facilitator: null
nav_exclude: true
---

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---

## The Setting

You’re suddenly awoken by an alarm. Still drowsy from sleep, you check the time 
on your phone. _7:00am??_ you think to yourself. _No way. I don’t even have any 
8ams. In fact, I haven’t woken up this early since…_ Looking back at your phone 
again, which you realize is now 2 times thicker and suddenly has a 3.5mm audio 
port, you check the year. You may have thought Berkeley was hell, but now you’ve 
traveled back in time for some true suffering: high school.

After getting dressed and lamenting your disastrous teenage fashion sense, you 
get a text message on your dumb phone. Sighing, you open it even though it’s 
going to cost you 10 cents.

```
FROM: 5cr1p7k1dd1337
MSG: w31c0m3 b4ck t0 h1ghsk00l. i h4v3 a t45k f0r j00: j00 mu5t 1n5ta11 th3
f0ll0w1ng 5cr1p7 0n 3v3ry c0mput3r 1n j00r sk00l by the 3nd 0f t0d4y, 0r j00l
b3 5tuCk 5ever.

j00r sk00l u535 puppet, s0 j00 c4n ju57 wr1t3 a m0dul3 f0r th15. F1l3s R @
https://github.com/0xcf/decal-labs 1n a8/
```

Rubbing your eyes, you try to understand 5cr1p7k1dd1337’s arcane runes once again:

```
Welcome back to high school. I have a task for you: you must install the
following script on every computer in your school by the end of today, or
you'll be stuck forever.

Your school uses puppet, so you can just write a module for this. Files are in
the decal-labs repo (https://github.com/0xcf/decal-labs) in the a8/ directory.
```

_Great_, you think to yourself, _good thing I’m currently taking the best DeCal at 
UC Berkeley, the Linux SysAdmin DeCal! This is gonna be a piece of cake_.

## Aside: Installing Puppet on your student VM

In order to save yourself from your circumstances, you'll need to set up Puppet on
your student VM so you can test your changes. Luckily, we've provided a snippet
of code to install the Puppet agent. Run the following block of code on your VM:

```
wget https://apt.puppetlabs.com/puppet6-release-bionic.deb && \
sudo dpkg -i puppet6-release-bionic.deb && \
sudo apt-get update && \
sudo apt-get -y install puppet-agent
```

Puppet will automatically add itself to `PATH`, but you may have to relog into
your VM for this to take effect. Afterwards, ensure you can run `puppet`, 
and you should be good to go!

## Your task, in plain English

You need to write a puppet module that places a script `hack_everything` into 
`/usr/local/bin/` and sets up a cronjob to run the script repeatedly and append 
its output to a file. Your module will need to install the dependencies for the 
script and ensure that all of the pieces are installed correctly.

**There are three main parts you'll need to work on:**

1. Installing the packages the script depends on
1. Placing the script in the right directory, and placing a file the script depends on in the right directory
1. Setting up cronjob to run the script every 30 minutes and append its output to a file

**We've provided skeleton code for you in the [decal-labs](https://github.com/0xcf/decal-labs) repository in `a8`, so make sure
to `git pull` the latest version!** The script `hack_everything` is located in 
`a8/modules/hacked/files/hack_everything`. 

**The only file you need to change is in `a8/modules/hacked/manifests/hacked.pp`.**
We've included some hints and points to relevant documentation that will help you
complete this manifest.

Although we are only applying your manifest on one machine (your DeCal VM), you could,
in theory, apply this module on thousands of machines that are connected to a puppet-master!
How neat is that!

While you're writing the manifest, there's an easy way to check your syntax: you can 
use the command `puppet parser validate hacking.pp`.

Once you have completed your manifest, you can apply the changes to your system
with this command (assuming you cloned `decal-labs` into $HOME):

```
sudo env "PATH=$PATH" puppet apply --modulepath=$HOME/decal-labs/a8/modules $HOME/decal-labs/a8/manifests/default.pp
```

Basically, we’re running puppet locally on the module we just created. 
`default.pp` is just a file that includes the hacked module you’re editing, 
and we need to be sure to include the path to the modules so puppet can find them.

The weird little `env` part is due to a Debian security feature known as `secure_path`,
which resets your `PATH` when you run sudo. Since `puppet` is not in this list of 
default paths, running it with regular `sudo` won't work.

Once this is done, you should be able to run the command `hack_everything` 
(as the script is now in your path). Try it out!

## Hints (if you need them)

- The [skeleton code](https://github.com/0xcf/decal-labs/tree/master/a8) has links to relevant docs. You should clone/download the `decal-labs` repository if you haven't already.
- [Here](https://github.com/ocf/puppet/blob/4e37cbedd228d89bc2f32234dbb4fc54114faa9d/modules/ocf_desktop/manifests/suspend.pp) is an example puppet manifest that might be helpful.
- More hints are available at live lab or by asking on #decal-general! 

## Extra fun (completely optional)

Using your knowledge of config management, you might like to try any of the following:

- Self-host something from [awesome-selfhosted](https://github.com/awesome-selfhosted/awesome-selfhosted) by writing a Puppet config file
- Try out another config management tool like [Ansible](https://www.ansible.com/) and consider how they differ.
- Check out the [OCF Puppet repository](ocf.io/gh/p), and submit a PR!

## Submission

Congratulations on finishing the lab!

To submit, upload `hacking.pp` into the Gradescope submission. (You **do not** need to upload the rest of the files in the skeleton, just the one file!)

**Providing feedback:** Since the submission consists entirely of the single file upload, there is no dedicated feedback question. Please leave your comments in the bottom of `hacking.pp` - there should be a section in the skeleton with more instructions. Thanks!
